At Berlioz's funeral, the horses drawing the hearse apparently bolted from the church of La Trinité to the Montmartre cemetery. This was a most fitting end for one who was not only eternally tormented, but genuinely racked by psychasthenia.
Throughout his entire career Berlioz was devastated by his failures, and the successes that came to him here and there seem to have been insufficient to restore the necessary balance.
That a composer of such calibre should have been mortified at winning the Rome Prize only at his fourth attempt is understandable; yet the excellent acclaim given to his Symphonie fantastique (1830), to Harold en Italie (1834), to the Requiem (1837) and to Roméo et Juliette (1839) should normally have offset his resentment at the sudden flop of Benvenuto Cellini at the Paris Opera (1838) and that of La Damnation de Faust at the Opéra-Comique (1846).
Referring to La Damnation, he even went as far as to write that : « Nothing in my career as an artist has wounded me more deeply ».
Yet he was still far from sounding the depths of the abyss : the disappointing Drury Lane concerts in London in 1848 and, above all, the « massacre » orchestrated in 1863 around his sweeping pageant, Les Troyens. This involved no less than ten cuts (including « La Chasse royale » recorded here) and the outright elimination of La Prise de Troie, eliciting this pathetic comment from him in his Mémoires: «Oh my noble Cassandra, my heroic virgin, so I must then resign myself, I shall never hear you ! »
Of the three pieces in La Damnation de Faust selected by André Cluytens, the « Ballet des Sylphes » alone comes from Huit scenes de Faust composed in 1828. « Marche hongroise» and « Menuet des follets » were composed in 1845 and 1846 «always on the spur of the moment, at home, at a café, at the Tuileries Gardens... »
This brings us to the remaining four overtures on this programme. That of Benvenuto Cellini long suffered from the ill repute of the opera itself, so, in 1844, almost textually drawing on elements from Benvenuto, Berlioz devised Le Carnaval romain, a work destined to immediate success.
Le Corsaire, sketched out as early as 1831 at Villa Medicis, was only revised, corrected and published in 1855.
Béatrice et Bénédict, like l'Enfance du Christ dating from 1854, stands on its own in Berlioz's opus. We are far from the tumultuous roar of the Requiem or of Les Troyens. The two exquisite little acts of this comic opera were much applauded at its creation in Baden on 9 August 1862. The composer drew his inspiration from Shakespeare's comedy Much Ado About Nothing.
Yet, once again, Berlioz registered this success with absolute indifference. His thoughts were entirely turned towards his Troyens that France, his country, neglected for so long in its original form.  END